You want to map to the user's concepts.
And listening to them and have them explain their problems and
solutions on a white board is an excellent way of learning that,
possibly reading a sort of simplified book about a topic.
If you're helping historians,
it would be a good idea to read a little bit of art history.
If you're helping biologists,
you probably want to learn something about the kind of biology you are doing;
genes, or protein folding,
or cells, things like that.
So you have to learn a bit so that you get the fundamental concepts.
Now, once you've gotten that,
you should start simple.
A lot of people try to build the perfect model of
the users of the customers world that never works.
What you have to do is to build the simplest version of
a few cases that you think you understand and then see if they work.
They won't work, not the first time.
What do you then do is you learn from this experience.
You have the customers,
users, whatever you call them,
tell you what you got slightly wrong and then you extend them
a little bit with the right facilities or fix them if they were wrong.
So basically, this is basic engineering.
You build something, you try it out,
you rely on feedback,
and then you evolve the system based on that.
Working perfectly the first time is an old joke.
It's a good joke and it's well worth remembering and
I'm reminding people of that and the last bug.